STYLE TRANSFER AI — FULL ARCHITECTURE SPEC
===========================================


OVERVIEW
--------
A system that learns a person's writing style from their corpus and transfers
that style onto AI-generated content. The user prompts the system, a large API
model generates a neutral high-quality draft, and a style model rewrites it to
sound like the specific person.

The system has three learned components:
  1. Style Embedder — encodes a person's style as a vector
  2. Style LLM — rewrites neutral text using that vector
  3. Discriminator — judges whether output matches real writing (used in training only)

At inference, only the Embedder and Style LLM are used. The discriminator is
training infrastructure only.


---


COMPONENT 1: STYLE EMBEDDER
----------------------------

Purpose:
  Takes a passage of someone's writing and produces a dense vector (the "style
  embedding") that captures how they write — not what they write about.

Base model:
  Start from LongFormer (allenai/longformer-base-4096). Long context is critical
  because style lives at the document level, not the sentence level. Standard
  BERT-size encoders miss too much.

Architecture:
  - Input: long passage (1000–2000 tokens ideally)
  - LongFormer encoder processes full passage
  - Hierarchical pooling:
      token embeddings → sentence vectors (mean pool per sentence)
      sentence vectors → paragraph vectors (attention pool)
      paragraph vectors → document vector (attention pool)
  - Linear projection head → 512d style embedding
  - L2 normalize output

  Hierarchical pooling matters because style operates at every scale
  simultaneously. A single CLS token is dominated by early tokens and
  misses paragraph-level and document-level patterns.

Training objective:
  Triplet contrastive loss:
    anchor   = real passage by Person A
    positive = different real passage by Person A (different topic)
    negative = neutral AI rewrite of Person A's anchor passage

  Loss = max(0, distance(anchor, positive) - distance(anchor, negative) + margin)

  The negative being a neutral rewrite of the same content is critical.
  It forces the embedder to learn style exclusively — topic is identical
  on both sides, so the embedder cannot use topic as a discriminating feature.
  This largely eliminates the content entanglement problem without needing
  gradient reversal tricks.

Auxiliary losses:
  Reconstruction loss — force the embedding to retain all signal, not just
  the easiest discriminative features. A small decoder tries to reconstruct
  the original passage from the embedding. If it can't, signal is being lost.

  Loss = reconstruction_quality (run alongside triplet loss, weighted sum)

Hard negative strategy:
  Round 1: neutral AI rewrites (as above) — easy negatives
  Round 2: "write in the style of Person A" prompted output — medium negatives
  Round 3: best output from current Style LLM — hard negatives

  Each round removes the signal the embedder already found, forcing it
  to go deeper. Run rounds in sequence as training progresses.

What the embedder is actually learning:
  The delta between neutral/AI writing and Person A's writing. It is a
  directional representation — not "here is Person A's style described"
  but "here is the transformation required to get from baseline to Person A."
  This framing maps cleanly to how the Style LLM uses the embedding.

Evaluation metrics:
  - Author identification accuracy: given an embedding, retrieve the correct
    author from a held-out pool. Target: >90% top-5 accuracy
  - Real vs. neutral discrimination AUC. Target: >95%
  - Topic invariance: same author different topics should have small distance;
    different authors same topic should have large distance. Measure ratio.
  - Generalization to unseen authors: hold out 20% of authors entirely during
    training. Test on those. This is the real production performance estimate.


---


COMPONENT 2: STYLE LLM
-----------------------

Purpose:
  Takes a neutral draft and a style embedding and rewrites the draft to sound
  like the person the embedding represents. It is a style transfer model, not
  a generative model. Content and ideas come from the big API model. This model
  only changes how things are said.

Base model:
  Small open source LLM — Mistral 7B, Phi-3, or Llama 3.1 8B.
  Smaller is better here. The task is focused and the quality floor is
  provided by the big API model upstream.

Injection mechanism:
  The style embedding is injected into the LLM's residual stream at every
  transformer layer via cross-attention adapters:

    For each transformer layer:
      hidden_state = transformer_block(hidden_state)
      hidden_state = hidden_state + project(style_embedding)

  The projection matrix is learned during training. It learns how much and
  where to apply the style shift per layer. Early layers likely shift surface
  features like punctuation and sentence length. Later layers likely shift
  deeper features like argument structure and rhetorical rhythm. The model
  discovers this automatically.

  Only the injection/adapter weights are trained. The base LLM weights are
  frozen. This keeps training tractable and prevents catastrophic forgetting.

Training data:
  Triplets:
    (neutral draft of Person A's text, Person A's style embedding, Person A's real text)

  Neutral drafts are generated by prompting a big API model:
    "Rewrite this passage in neutral, clear prose. Preserve all meaning and
     structure but remove any idiosyncratic style."

  Prompts for training are reverse-engineered from real text:
    Feed real text to big API model → "What prompt would produce this content?"
    Noisy but workable at scale.

Training objective:
  Standard next-token prediction loss on Person A's real text, given the
  neutral draft and style embedding as input. The model learns to follow
  style embeddings as a general skill across thousands of authors.

What the model learns:
  Not any specific person's style. The general skill of "given a style
  embedding, shift my generation in the direction that embedding indicates."
  Each person's style lives entirely in their stored embedding vector.
  The model weights are shared across all users.


---


COMPONENT 3: DISCRIMINATOR (TRAINING ONLY)
-------------------------------------------

Purpose:
  Judges whether Style LLM output is indistinguishable from real Person A
  writing. Provides adversarial reward signal to the Style LLM.

Architecture:
  The Embedder itself serves as the discriminator. It already knows how to
  measure distance between real writing and AI imitation — that's exactly
  what it was trained to do.

  Discriminator score = distance between Style LLM output embedding
                        and Person A's real writing embedding cluster

  If distance is small → Style LLM output is close to real writing → positive reward
  If distance is large → Style LLM output is far from real writing → negative reward

Adversarial training loop:
  1. Big API model generates neutral draft
  2. Style LLM transforms it using Person A's embedding
  3. Embedder scores the output: how close to real Person A writing?
  4. Style LLM gets positive reward if score is high, negative if low
  5. Embedder simultaneously gets rewarded for correct discrimination
  6. Both improve. Each makes the other harder to fool.

Mode collapse prevention:
  Mode collapse = Style LLM finds one transformation that fools the embedder
  and repeats it forever. Prevent by:
  - Enforcing topic diversity across training batches
  - Penalizing output similarity across different generations
  - Keeping neutral draft as anchor — heavy penalty if Style LLM drifts
    too far from the source meaning


---


DATA PIPELINE
-------------

Corpus sources:
  - Project Gutenberg — long-form authored text, clean, many authors
  - Common Crawl filtered by author — blogs, essays, informal writing
  - Substack archives — newsletters, modern voice, high style variance
  - Academic papers by author — formal register
  - Twitter/X archives — short-form, extremely varied style

  Prioritize author diversity over volume. 10,000 authors with 5 documents
  each beats 100 authors with 500 documents each. The embedding space needs
  broad coverage to generalize to new users.

Data preparation steps:
  1. Collect and tag everything by author
  2. Clean — remove low quality, non-native, or mixed-author text
  3. Chunk into 1000–2000 token passages
  4. Enforce topic diversity when sampling pairs from same author
     (anchor and positive should be on different topics)
  5. Generate neutral drafts for every real passage using big API model
     — these serve as negatives for embedder training AND inputs for
       Style LLM training. One generation step serves both purposes.
  6. Build triplets automatically from the above

Corpus size requirements per user at inference:
  < 1,000 words    → surface style only (vocabulary, punctuation)
  5,000–20,000     → sentence and paragraph patterns
  50,000+          → deep rhetorical and structural style
  200,000+         → worldview, argument structure, idiosyncrasy

  For sparse users, lean on the embedding's generalization rather than
  expecting deep personalization. Be honest about this in the product.


---


FULL TRAINING SEQUENCE
----------------------

Phase 1 — Train Embedder Round 1
  - Build triplets: (real passage, different real passage, neutral draft)
  - Train with triplet loss + reconstruction auxiliary loss
  - Evaluate: author ID accuracy, real vs neutral AUC, topic invariance
  - Target: >90% author ID, >95% AUC before moving on

Phase 2 — Train Style LLM Round 1
  - Freeze embedder
  - Generate style embeddings for all authors in corpus
  - Auto-generate prompts from real text
  - Train injection weights on (neutral draft + style embedding) → real text
  - Evaluate: does output move toward real passage? meaning preserved?
  - Human eval: does it sound more like the person?

Phase 3 — Generate Hard Negatives
  - Run all neutral drafts through current Style LLM with each author's embedding
  - These are now harder negatives than round 1 — the Style LLM is already
    imitating style to some degree
  - Store alongside easy negatives

Phase 4 — Retrain Embedder with Hard Negatives
  - Unfreeze embedder
  - Retrain with full triplet set (easy + medium + hard negatives)
  - Embedder must now discriminate against much better imitations
  - Forces it to find deeper signal it previously ignored

Phase 5 — Adversarial Loop
  - Freeze embedder
  - Style LLM generates output → embedder scores it → Style LLM gets reward signal
  - Embedder gets rewarded for correct discrimination
  - Monitor for mode collapse throughout
  - Continue until both models plateau

Phase 6 — Final Evaluation
  - Test on completely held-out authors (seen zero times during training)
  - Human eval from people who know the writer personally
  - This is your real world performance estimate

Repeat phases 3–5 as needed until human eval scores plateau.


---


INFERENCE PIPELINE
------------------

Onboarding a new user:
  1. User uploads writing corpus
  2. Embedder runs once on corpus → produces style embedding vector
  3. Vector stored in database (just an array of 512 floats per user)

Handling a user request:
  1. User types prompt
  2. Big API model (GPT-4, Claude, etc.) generates neutral high-quality draft
  3. Style LLM transforms draft using user's stored style embedding
  4. Output returned to user

Feedback loop:
  - Thumbs up/down on every output
  - Negative feedback flags that (neutral draft, output, embedding) triplet
  - Periodically retrain on flagged examples
  - Style embeddings can be refined over time as user adds more writing

Scalability:
  Every user is just a stored vector. No per-user fine-tuning. No adapter
  swapping. The model weights are identical for all users. Scales to millions
  of users with trivial storage overhead.


---


KEY RISKS
---------

1. Style vector may not be fully linear — the transformation from AI to
   Person A may require different shifts in different contexts. A single
   fixed vector applied uniformly is an approximation.

2. LLM priors are strong — the base LLM has strong gravity toward average
   fluent English. The style shift competes against billions of parameters.
   Surface style is easier to shift than deep structure.

3. Content entanglement — embedder may partially encode topic despite the
   neutral draft negative strategy. Monitor topic invariance metric closely.

4. Corpus quality — most users' writing will be inconsistent across time
   and context. Emails sound nothing like blog posts. Consider per-register
   embeddings for power users.

5. Evaluation is subjective — a model that fools your discriminator may
   still be obviously off to humans who know the writer. Invest heavily in
   human eval from the start.

6. Mode collapse in adversarial training — monitor output diversity closely.


---


TECH STACK
----------

Training:
  PyTorch
  HuggingFace Transformers (base models)
  HuggingFace Datasets (corpus handling)
  PEFT library (adapter/injection layers)
  Weights & Biases (experiment tracking — log everything)

Models:
  Embedder base: allenai/longformer-base-4096
  Style LLM base: mistralai/Mistral-7B or microsoft/Phi-3-mini
  Big API model: Claude or GPT-4 via API (neutral draft generation)

Infrastructure:
  Vector DB for style embeddings (Pinecone, Weaviate, or pgvector)
  GPU cluster for training (A100s ideally)
  Standard web backend for product UI